# Bridging-the-Digital-Divide
Bridging the Digital Divide
Despite technological innovations and increasing literacy in the developed world, there still exists a market made up of the technologically illiterate in developing countries left untapped by software developers who struggle with making applications that can be used by the illiterate. Inequality in access to information and online resources is a pressing issue, often forgotten by those in developed countries who rarely see it firsthand. However, inequality, when left unchecked, can often be a catalyst for large-scale poverty and can breed antagonistic sentiments between those who have and those who have not. Solving this issue will take time, but it is still important to take the first step.

One place to start would be India. Smartphone penetration in this developing country has increased from 2.75% in 2010 to 54.73% in 2021. Forecasts estimate that this penetration rate will reach 96% by 2040[1]. At the same time, the literacy rate in India has remained stagnant at around 70% of the adult population over the last 10 years. This is a statistic that is quickly being overtaken by countries such as Brazil, and China[2]. Additionally, a part of this literate population can be classified as semi-literate - which is often defined as the inability to read or write fluently.

Despite the large number of technologically illiterate Indians nowadays, modern-day applications are often focused on the more educated and technologically literate part of the population. The risk posed here is the worsening of the digital divide - a widening of the gap between those who have access to online resources and those who do not[3]. This can reduce the barrier to entry for the illiterate and poor to get access to educational material, conduct business online, use government services, communicate with others and more.

Understanding why this issue persists requires a basic understanding of application development. Many of the symbols and icons commonly found in applications are often targeted at the western audience. However, these icons do sometimes get lost in translation when applied to the Indian market. For example, a reflective article by a software developer developing applications in India brought up the fact that using pictures to illustrate concepts for those who cannot read is not that simple. For example, Indians found pictures illustrating toilets to be confusing. His team had used images of western-style toilets rather than the squatting toilets those testing the app in India were used to[4]. This serves to illustrate that logos which are not culturally accurate can often make an app confusing to use. Hence, a barrier to entry for companies hoping to release their app in the Indian market is the deep cultural understanding required to make them desirable.

One approach used to overcome technological illiteracy is to design applications in an iterative fashion. Developers often start creating the basics of the application, with some expected cultural adjustments like translation. Then, they allow users to test it and collect feedback regarding the features they are uncertain about. Based on the feedback, developers change and improve the product to make it more user-friendly. However, the problem with this approach is that it is quite slow. New developers often have to repeat the same work that others have already done to develop their own apps. Moreover, the time-to-market and cost associated with additional testing can make application development for the Indian market financially unviable. This can often discourage many app makers from developing applications for the Indian market at all. This can worsen the digital divide between India and western markets where application development is easier.

Solving this issue would require a way to assist developers, both within and outside India, to understand the cultural landscape in India. A common language to help developers know the logos and pictures to use to illustrate common concepts would be game changing when it comes to creating new applications. However, this would not be a completely new approach. Gaming companies like Nintendo who often create their games in Japan have a localization team specially built to make games easily accessible for audiences around the world. A team or product that could provide localization in this manner for any company that needed it would decrease the time needed from ideation to market release. The feasibility of developing applications in the Indian market would be improved significantly. This would help to decrease the digital divide by enabling software developers to create applications that the technologically illiterate can understand.

In the end, an innovation in this field would be life-changing for 30% of India’s population, amounting to just over 417,810,000 Indian citizens[5]. Moreover, it could spell an entirely new market for application developers to explore, enabling them to increase their revenue and profits, without spending excessive money in research and iteration. The question now is: who will be the first to fill in the gap?

-//-

[1] Smartphone penetration rate in India from 2010 to 2020, with estimates until 2040, Statista Key Market Indicators, Jul. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www-statista-com.libproxy1.nus.edu.sg/statistics/1229799/india-smartphone-penetration-rate/

[2] India: Literacy rate in 2011, 2015 and 2018, by gender, World Bank, Jul. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www-statista-com.libproxy1.nus.edu.sg/statistics/271335/literacy-rate-in-india/

[3] E. Klecun, “Bringing lost sheep into the fold: Questioning the discourse of the digital divide”, IT & People, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 267-282, 2002, doi: 10.1108/09593840810896028.

[4] A. Cox, “Designing Apps for the Illiterate and Digitally Challenged…India Edition,” in Medium, Jul. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://alexcox245.medium.com/designing-apps-for-the-illiterate-and-digitally-challenged-india-edition-5a19d176b49c

[5] India: Estimated total population from 2016 to 2026 (in millions), International Monetary Fund, Apr. 2021. [Online] Available: https://www-statista-com.libproxy1.nus.edu.sg/statistics/263766/total-population-of-india/

[ 632 words ]
